JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Europ
pledge to take in those fleeing
-- the challenges of food, shelt
a new nation home.
LEONARD DOYLE, International Org
for Migration: The generosity th
seen from the European public is
And we're seeing that they're ah
politicians, who quite often are
the right wing or indeed fearful
the budgetary implications of br
migrants and refugees.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead on thi
Monday: a look at the fight over
minimum wage -- what $15 an hour
workers and business.
Plus:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
A shutdown would be completely i
It'd be an unforced error.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama w
of a government shutdown and rai
GOP presidential candidates' war
-- the week ahead in politics wi
and Tamara Keith.
All that and more on tonight's "
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There was renewed
as countries across Europe tried
the influx of thousands of migra
Hundreds of people broke through
police lines near the Serbian bo
north on the main highway to Bud
refugees outnumbered police, who
spray to try to maintain order.
asylum-seekers have arrived in t
European Union already this year
The developments come as all of
how to handle the new wave of re
Chancellor Angela Merkel said th
countries should pitch in. But H
minister, Viktor Orban, question
quota system.
Meanwhile, French President Fran
pledged to take 24,000 refugees
two years. And British Prime Min
Cameron said that Britain will e
refugee program, and resettle up
Syrians over the next five years
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime Min
should fulfill its moral respons
help those refugees, just as we
so proudly throughout our histor
doing so, we must use our head a
by pursuing a comprehensive appr
tackles the causes of the proble
as the consequences. That means
stabilize countries where the re
coming from.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A U.N. official e
as many as four million Syrian r
now try and head to Europe, unle
helps Syria's neighbors, Lebanon
Turkey, offset costs of caring f
President Obama used this Labor
to require companies doing busin
federal government to give paid
to their employees. The White Ho
the executive order will benefit
workers. The president said the
benefit employers by improving r
recruitment.
The defense minister of Iraq nar
being hit by a sniper outside Ba
Islamic State gunmen targeted hi
it traveled near Islamic State-c
territory. One guard was wounded
Meanwhile, in Syria, human right
reported that Islamic State mili
taken control of another oil fie
at Jazal in the central province
In Guatemala, there will be a ru
election after candidates split
vote. It comes just after the re
of the country's leader amid a c
scandal. Ballot counting went on
and showed a wealthy businessman
first lady both trailing former
Morales, who's never held politi
JIMMY MORALES, Guatemalan Presid
(through translator): We are par
population that doesn't want mor
of course. Our proposal has come
and our proposal is reduced into
A healthy and educated populatio
JUDY WOODRUFF: The top two finis
advance to the runoff election s
25.
In economic news, Chinese stocks
today, even after the head of Ch
Bank said that his country's mar
appears to be coming to an end.
did calm investor jitters in Eur
there managed modest gains, stil
lighter than usual with Wall Str
for the Labor Day holiday.
Harvard Law Professor Lawrence L
become the sixth Democrat to ent
for the White House. The 54-year
Dakota native made the announcem
in an interview with ABC, after
exploratory committee raised $1
has pledged to make campaign fin
and voting rights issues top pri
And scientists in Britain announ
they believe they have found an
prehistoric monument near the ru
but it's underground. University
researchers used remote sensor t
to find about 100 stones toppled
of a large arena. Some of them w
stood more than 15-feet high whe
built around 4,500 years ago. Th
about two miles from Stonehenge.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
provide sanctuary for more migra
debating raises to the minimum w
more.
We return now to the migrant and
in Europe.
Joining me to discuss the latest
and what they mean as the contin
for a solution is Leonard Doyle
Organization for Migration.
Leonard Doyle, welcome.
So now, as we see more and more
offering to take in tens of thou
migrants, is that going to be su
accommodate all of them?
LEONARD DOYLE, International Org
for Migration: We will have to w
First of all, thank you so much
me on.
But the generosity that's been s
European public is extraordinary
seeing that they're ahead of the
who quite often are fearful of t
or indeed fearful of the cost, t
implications of bringing in migr
But what we're seeing is encoura
it's also going to bring a tidal
people from Syria. There are 11
people and word is out that they
in Europe. So, let's expect to s
on the way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in other word
idea that they're now accepting
a signal it's OK for more to com
LEONARD DOYLE: Indeed.
And this has of course been the
the so-called pull factor, that
the doors too wide and give too
wedge, you will encourage more a
come. And, indeed, it's the pric
paying for the lack of decisions
of a coherent policy and lack of
to bring people in, in an orderl
way.
Because it's so chaotic, you see
across in boats and indeed drown
that tragic scene of the young S
that moved international hearts
so much over the last couple of
JUDY WOODRUFF: We know, Leonard
many, many of the migrants and r
already left Syria, Afghanistan,
the African continent, to go to
in the region, Turkey, Jordan, L
example.
Why is it not sufficient for the
in some of these countries that
to home?
LEONARD DOYLE: Well, it's a good
I think if they had any confiden
was any day soon going to return
they would probably stay, becaus
It's -- refugees, displaced peop
leaving home. They have got very
of kinship and bonds to their co
don't want to leave that behind.
But I think the despair of what'
in Syria, the lack of any politi
means that they're moving on. An
want to stay in a camp in Jordan
safe that camp may be? These are
want to raise their kids, want t
for them and want to move on in
So, even though they may be tech
where they are, they want to get
security for their future. And I
is really what this is telling u
proper indictment of the interna
really for not sorting out the p
Syria to ensure that innocent pe
suffering.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why don't we see
like Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Bahr
taking in refugees? What's going
LEONARD DOYLE: Well, that's a ve
There's been a lot of criticism
the Gulf states, but some of it
They have paid inordinate amount
towards the humanitarian cause o
indeed of Syria. They have taken
of people. A key difference is t
not offering them a track toward
They're not offering them asylum
And refugees, they know what the
they want a secure place to be i
And so I think they're voting wi
and going elsewhere, even though
quite different for them perhaps
an indictment in a way of the la
that they're now getting from th
And I think it's been a wakeup c
too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leonard Doyle, do
how we refer to these people, wh
them migrants or refugees? How d
that?
LEONARD DOYLE: Well, it is, inde
You have -- the refugees are a s
those who are fleeing war or hum
abuses, and they are entitled to
international law, under the Gen
the convention in 1951. So, it's
to decide. It's an international
Now, if everybody is going to be
refugee, then governments would
to extend that welcome as they s
I think it's terribly important
that the broad mass are called m
who are moving for all sorts of
for human rights reasons or whet
improvement.
They could also be people being
sex trafficking, labor trafficki
unaccompanied minors, young chil
important to keep the distinctio
all migrants, but within them th
specific categories who need pro
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have a goo
of what it is -- what kinds of s
are going to be provided once th
in these destination countries,
Germany or France or the U.K. or
else? What are they getting when
there?
LEONARD DOYLE: Well, I think one
happened is that these countries
shamed really into opening their
into providing proper care and a
for them.
Whereas they may have been tryin
for budgetary reasons, their pub
has said it's not good enough. S
can expect to be housed properly
be in temporary housing like bar
they will be fed and clothed and
be given integration packages to
learn about the new culture that
language courses, clothing, care
children.
Many of them need psychosocial h
have had horrific experiences wh
come from. So, I think the ones
into the European Union are the
those who perhaps stay in the re
in Jordan and Lebanon or, indeed
maybe not so lucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just finally,
watching who want to help in som
they're in the United States or
else, what can they do?
LEONARD DOYLE: Well, there are m
can extend their generosity.
And one way is of course to dona
organization, International Orga
Migration, has a Web site called
there are many others where we w
encourage people to contribute,
makes a big difference. Looking
refugee family is a very costly
one migrant family equally.
And it's not easy to do this. An
help them directly, well, let's
indirectly, because to see innoc
suffering in this way is shockin
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leonard Doyle wit
Organization for Migration, we t
LEONARD DOYLE: Thank you very mu
for having me on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was just three
when more than 100 fast food wor
York City first began walking of
to demand higher wages and bette
conditions. Now a $15-an-hour mi
is becoming a reality for many l
across the country.
Jeffrey Brown has our Labor Day
JEFFREY BROWN: This summer has b
one for the movement. Los Angele
agreed to raise the minimum wage
hour to $15. Mayors of eight oth
near San Francisco, including Sa
expected to soon endorse a simil
New York State is moving toward
wage for all fast food workers;
been signed into law in other ci
Seattle, with wages hiked gradua
on the city, between 2017 and 20
We look at the movement's growin
and questions about its impact.
Robert Reich is former secretary
and now professor of public poli
University of California at Berk
a workers walkout at a McDonald'
His new book is called "Saving C
For the Many, Not the Few." And
is an economist who studies labo
wages. He's a scholar at the Ame
Institute.
And I want to welcome both of yo
Robert Reich, let me start with
Overview first. Is it fair to se
as taking real hold and why do y
has picked up so much momentum?
ROBERT REICH, Former U.S. Labor
Jeff, I do think that it is taki
I think it's picked up momentum
one thing, the minimum wage in r
adjusted for inflation, keeps on
If we had the same minimum wage
in 1968, adjusted for inflation,
be over $10 today.
I think a lot of people who are
lower middle class and poor are
look, this is just simply unfair
you have got a lot of middle cla
people are saying, we're paying
taxes to keep working people out
which is effectively a subsidy t
low-wage employers. And that's n
JEFFREY BROWN: Michael Strain, h
assess the strength of the movem
is behind it?
MICHAEL STRAIN, American Enterpr
Well, I think there's no questio
movement is strong and seems to
stronger and, by their metrics o
they have racked up some real vi
I think if we raise the minimum
an hour or similar levels in the
it will create winners, it will
In my judgment, there are going
losers than winners. I think it'
strategy. But I certainly unders
motivating these workers and the
and I admire the goal, which is
working poor and working class A
JEFFREY BROWN: Is there evidence
to support the losers propositio
making? Do you see things, or is
you are speculating?
MICHAEL STRAIN: Well, this is al
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
MICHAEL STRAIN: And there have b
anecdotal pieces of evidence tha
seen in the newspaper.
It's much too early for any sort
economic study of the effects of
we're all kind of flying blind,
increases the riskiness of the s
makes it even less wise than if
a bit of evidence about it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Robert Reic
still questions at this point ab
of countereffects one might see
point it might kick in if you mo
and very far. What do you see so
ROBERT REICH: There's a lot of r
the country that has compared st
you have the federal minimum wag
to states that have put their mi
above the federal level -- and t
under federal law -- comparing o
of border what's happened to lab
And they have actually found tha
that have raised their minimum w
has been little or no negative j
that is, no increase in unemploy
for two reasons, one, because if
people more money, they will spe
that creates jobs in that local
and, secondly, because a lot of
attracted into the labor market
not otherwise look for a job whe
wages are raised.
And that gives employers more ch
to hire, meaning less turnover,
Employers save money.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what's the do
you're seeing, Michael Strain, o
worry about?
MICHAEL STRAIN: Well, I think th
Reich is correct that there are
that show that there are not str
Some studies show there are stro
It's worth noting that the nonpa
highly respected Congressional B
thinks that, if we raise the fed
wage to $10.10, there will be hu
thousands fewer jobs. So I don't
debate is settled on this.
I'm worried about the magnitude
This minimum wage increase, $15
big cities, will go very high up
distribution. It will cover a qu
of workers in some of these citi
something to be concerned about.
And in addition...
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me just stop
Do you think it has a different
different wage earners?
MICHAEL STRAIN: Oh, I think so.
I think the existing evidence lo
increases in the minimum wage an
a broad class of workers. Going
know, $9 an hour or whatever it
states to $15 is not a modest in
And, in addition, doing this onl
causes problems, potential probl
because it puts workers in that
comparative disadvantage to a ve
suburb. And the question is, are
to see suburban businesses grow
workers living inside the city l
to be being at a significant dis
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Robert Reic
one I have heard and we have all
the last couple of years, just t
that it creates even within a pa
What's your response to that?
ROBERT REICH: Well, it would be
the entire federal minimum wage
uniformly across the country muc
it is right now and still allow
raise their own state minimum wa
But -- and I also think that Mic
good point about the possibility
I mean, we just don't know. But
places that have increased their
are phasing them in. They're not
suddenly overnight.
We also have an ethical issue he
there are job losses, we -- you
society, we have established min
of decency. We don't have child
require employers to provide saf
even though that increased drama
some cases the cost of labor.
We simply don't say the market i
define everything about the way
so decency, morality, kind of et
obviously do play a part here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you bo
last couple of minutes -- I will
you, Michael Strain -- the large
larger context, is that wage gro
so flat over the -- and remains
MICHAEL STRAIN: Well, I think th
question. Lots of possibilities.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Of course it is.
about 30 -- I'm kidding you.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: But I know it's a
but it's one we have been asking
years now.
MICHAEL STRAIN: Yes.
I subscribe to the simple answer
hit really hard in the great rec
that we're still suffering from
demand, and that when demand com
businesses will be faced with th
compete harder to attract worker
workers, and that's going to cau
go up, and I think we're just no
JEFFREY BROWN: Robert Reich, wha
to that hard, big question?
ROBERT REICH: Yes, I will tell y
just the great recession.
If you go back to 1978-'79, wage
flatten and diverge from product
And really the typical wage earn
almost no increase in wages, adj
inflation, since the late 1970s.
I think the real reason is that
have really pushed wages down, u
globalization, substituting tech
workers, and creating -- and bas
unions. All of that has generate
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Michae
you get a quick last word, since
MICHAEL STRAIN: Well, I would li
something that he said earlier.
I completely agree that this is
and the goal of helping low-wage
workers is a very good goal and
be used, not just markets. I thi
better alternatives to the minim
Earned Income Tax Credit puts mo
in these workers' pockets. It do
the risk of putting workers out
actually brings people into jobs
And I think it's just a much sup
So, we don't disagree on the goa
on the means to get there. And I
are just simply much better poli
the minimum wage.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, we wil
right there.
Thank you both very much, Michae
Robert Reich.
ROBERT REICH: Thanks, Jeff.
MICHAEL STRAIN: Thank you very m
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
in politics with Amy Walter and
how Denmark is leading the way i
and innovative thinkers in tech
bringing new ideas to the public
But, first, as we have been repo
of Syrian refugees and others ar
over the weekend, sometimes to c
Tonight, we take a look at what
after the fanfare fades.
Matt Frei of Independent Televis
this report from Berlin.
MATT FREI: On a hot late summer'
in the park in Moabit in Central
something unexpected. At first,
think the clusters of people in
on the grass are here for a picn
you notice their luggage and the
and their despair, and the numbi
of ordinary families for whom th
has become the new normal.
Most oft people here are Syrian
The last time they slept in thei
could have been a year ago, perh
ago. But for now, this is the en
odyssey from Syria via Turkey, G
Hungary, and Austria, to the cou
that is more willing to take the
other.
Syrians are at the top of the pe
They're virtually guaranteed asy
you're from Gaza, and you have b
for eight days for your papers,
little nervous, like Mohamed.
MAN: Hopefully, this is going to
country, my new home. But I'm no
that.
MATT FREI: You're not sure about
MAN: Yes, I'm not sure about rig
MATT FREI: Until you have your p
MAN: Yes. Hopefully.
MATT FREI: You will get them. An
you choose Germany and not Swede
MAN: Actually, Germany, there's
in Germany. It's a big country.
is free. I can complete my maste
I got scholarship from Germany b
here. But they -- I could not go
Gaza.
MATT FREI: After the refugee tra
refugee bureaucracy, the anxious
official papers, accommodation a
money of 200 pounds a month per
And then there's the matter of f
of the soup and sandwich brigade
volunteers. Five-year-old Hassan
in underaged resilience. He trie
hands on some soup and bread, fo
lucky. And then this urchin of t
trail hands the bowl to his moth
By the end of the day, the food
is more chaotic. In fact, the Be
are so overwhelmed by the number
barely cope. So, most of the wor
by volunteers, lots of them.
Aneta (ph), the second from the
single mother of two and current
And Frank, opposite her, is a re
manager with a few languages up
MAN: It's boring sitting on the
TV.
MATT FREI: So, you're here helpi
MAN: I'm here helping out. Yes.
with this job. It's not paid, bu
happy.
MATT FREI: Germany is taking in
of its population, 800,000 peopl
as asylum-seekers. That's an awf
it? It's a huge number.
WOMAN: It's a huge number. But i
to faces, when you see the peopl
I think we have a duty at least
MATT FREI: Are you also motivate
history, maybe by some collectiv
guilt about what Germany did to
Europe in the past?
WOMAN: Yes, I think so. I think
in '63, so -- in West Germany.
MATT FREI: Like me.
(LAUGHTER)
WOMAN: So it's kind of -- you kn
this at school, and you have to
it's kind of guilt, but not only
something -- is to do something
MATT FREI: On to the next challe
a place to stay.
As night falls, the makeshift ca
out and there is a scramble. As
you're always rushing from one b
to the next. Families, women and
get put on buses to army barrack
turned refugee centers, but the
be left on the street, unless th
volunteer host like Philip Bushn
his family, one of hundreds who
up.
We joined them for breakfast, th
son Oscar, mother Suzie pregnant
two, and their Syrian house gues
Abdu, fleeing ISIS. The Bushnes
Arab or Kurdish, and the guests
English or German, so table talk
complicated.
MAN: Six?
MAN: Twenty-five.
MAN: Twenty-five?
MAN: Ah, 25.
MAN: Reza?
MAN: Twenty-six.
MAN: Twenty-five.
MATT FREI: So, here, we have got
Google Translate history of the
The word (SPEAKING GERMAN) pops
because Suzie is pregnant. (SPEA
means black tea, (SPEAKING GERMA
to Germany.
What do you say to those people
say, well, actually, I don't wan
foreigners in my house; I don't
are?
MAN: I say do your "Star Wars" a
Yoda said, fear leads to anger,
to hate, hate leads to suffering
drop it. There is nothing to be
seriously.
MATT FREI: The man with the tatt
would beg to differ. "Those who
Germany should leave Germany," h
friends shout.
This is a march organized by tin
scored 0.3 percent of the vote i
federal election.
"Whoever makes it to Germany can
forever. Are we living in a madh
the regional leader of the Natio
Party asks.
The party has couched its hatred
in a mission against Islamic fan
though that's precisely what so
Syrian refugees are fleeing.
On the other side of the road, t
pro-refugee gather, slogans in E
has been more welcoming and tole
than any other country in Europe
Angela Merkel is trying to shame
of the E.U. to share in more of
This country knows more than per
about the perils of intolerance,
all this could lead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: While many
enjoyed a day off today, those e
House or already working there u
to speak to voters.
It's a holiday that historically
the race for the White House in
the election. But this Labor Day
two dozen candidates already run
it was another day on the trail.
Republican Scott Walker, who gai
headlines a few years ago by tak
labor as governor of Wisconsin,
to stand out from the pack, writ
people have the freedom to choos
want to be in a labor union or n
pro-worker"
President Obama's not running, b
back, without naming them, at Wa
Jersey Governor Chris Christie.
rally, the president took some o
direct swipes yet at the Republi
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
One candidate, he is bragging ab
destroyed collective bargaining
his state, and says that busting
him to fight ISIL.
And then there was the guy -- th
running for office -- they're ru
the presidency -- who said a uni
a punch in the face.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President Bi
deciding whether to run, echoed
rallying call to organized labor
of income inequality.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
States: Back in the '70s, when y
started in the steel mills, Leo,
situation was that the CEO made
25, 26 times the average employe
make 400 times as much. What hap
happened?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Other Republican
were out on the trail. But Donal
is leading all national GOP poll
have any public events.
As we enter this next phase of t
it's a particularly good Monday
Monday.
Joining me are Tamara Keith of N
Walter of The Cook Political Rep
Welcome, and thank you for being
Day.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political R
JUDY WOODRUFF: So we have been r
I know you have seen it as well
refugee crisis in Europe. We hav
how the European countries are -
them are offering to take in the
Just in the last hour or so, Tam
the White House is now telling r
they are looking seriously at wh
States can do. What are you hear
that?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public Ra
an administration official has c
me that they are considering a w
of options in responding to the
including possible refugee reset
And I e-mailed back and said, in
And they said yes. So, that is a
is a response that is clearly no
yet, but they're working on it a
people to know that they're work
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I was reading
already spends something like $4
year in Syria, so they're lookin
also at spending more money.
Amy, do you see this becoming an
is some talk about -- well, more
-- about whether Congress is goi
at this when they come back into
AMY WALTER: Well, and, certainly
now is saying we're looking at b
refugees into the country, I thi
will be an issue.
And you're seeing the Republican
up as a security issue, and the
is being raised by many of the 2
at least is that a Syrian refuge
terrorist. We may -- by letting
people in, we may be letting som
in that are dangerous to the U.S
we screen them properly?
So that, I think, will be brough
on the campaign trail and will b
up in Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do we see a diffe
know a couple of the Republicans
I guess even Donald Trump, even
position on the border, on immig
said, you know, possibly the U.S
to take in...
TAMARA KEITH: And I think that i
all he has said thus far. It has
detailed policy prescription or
John Kasich also said possibly m
could be sent to help with the c
then otherwise, the candidates h
-- the Republican candidates hav
been saying this is a European p
trying to push that off and make
problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But pretty much,
the Democrats are saying, we wil
we have to do.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And Martin O'
is running for president, a Demo
Maryland governor, has come out
he thinks that the U.S. needs to
increase the number of Syrian re
into the country in the coming y
AMY WALTER: But everybody has be
be clear, everyone's been very v
wants to sort of step out on thi
the Martin O'Malley number. Even
wasn't being very specific about
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, I did notice
So it is Labor Day. And, Amy, yo
-- I notice you have said that t
traditional jumping off point fo
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have had these
running for months and months an
But things are going to change.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Right. We have been
Monday now for a long time. And
been a lot to talk about.
But, believe it or not -- and I'
you people who live in the early
this -- the money has not even b
spent yet. We're starting to see
PACs and the candidates tell us
they're going to start advertisi
states.
They're putting big, big media b
New Hampshire, and South Carolin
going to hear more about candida
going to see more issues being r
have another debate coming up on
16 with the Republicans. Democra
see until October. But there's g
a lot more in the mix now and a
spent than we have seen up until
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is advertising go
the main difference, do you thin
TAMARA KEITH: Well, Hillary Clin
has announced that they're going
in another $4.1 million for ads
keep the ads on the air through
and October in New Hampshire and
that is a change.
I mean, they have been on the ai
They will continue to be on the
are one thing. I think that we l
see more of the candidates also.
to be crunch time.
AMY WALTER: Yes. Hillary Clinton
Andrea Mitchell last week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She had her first
in a long time.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: She is going to be
DeGeneres show this week, which
says television is a way for her
a larger audience. Certainly, El
has a large audience and sort of
audience than some other outlets
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it may also r
feeling that she needs to get he
out there at a time when she's h
There was yet another poll today
I guess, NBC poll showing she's
Bernie Sanders in New Hampshire.
behind. And now he's even starti
up with her in Iowa. What does t
looking at some difficulties. Is
about Hillary Clinton or is it a
Sanders and maybe Joe Biden gett
AMY WALTER: I think it's a combi
all of these things.
Now, if you talk to the Hillary
-- and they said this from the v
-- we expect this to be close. N
ever won on the Democratic side
Hampshire by a significant margi
by less than 50 percent of the v
knew this race was going to get
said.
Now, they said this at the very
But the one thing that we have t
with Bernie Sanders, the questio
well is he going to do in Iowa,
is, what happens next? Where Ber
does very well is with liberal v
he has been doing really well in
that have a lot of liberal voter
voters.
The question for Bernie Sanders
do well among the minority voter
up a very significant chunk of t
base? And the next polling I wou
see is from South Carolina, a st
third in the map, but has an ele
the Democratic side that's 50 pe
African-American.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Tamara, is t
going to shake out? Are we going
-- are we going to see the conto
before we get to the South Carol
TAMARA KEITH: I think that we wi
sense. Once some decent polling
we will have a sense of how Sout
is going.
He's back in the state again. He
is not taking it for granted, bu
wants to work for it. But he has
that he has a great organization
he has an OK organization on the
New Hampshire, and he has a lot
do in South Carolina and Nevada.
Meanwhile, Clinton's people are
we have got a 50-state strategy,
sort of do. They had people orga
the ground in all 50 states unti
-- but you can't account for mom
Bern -- or Bern-mentum or feelin
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: And I have say tha
supporters are not saying they d
Hillary Clinton. They are saying
Bernie Sanders, that he's saying
that speaks to them. And that ca
off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk quickl
Republicans. There are lot of th
about.
But, Amy, what do you make of th
taking a shot? He didn't name Sc
or Chris Christie, but it was ve
AMY WALTER: But he really did na
There is only one candidate in t
has made collective bargaining a
on the unions the centerpiece of
Look, this is the same message t
Obama had going into the 2012 el
to make it this choice between p
Democrats looking out for the re
Republicans looking out for the
He's going to keep driving that
Two big changes, though, is, in
not on the ballot, and, number t
are on the ballot. This will be
of an Obama economy that the Dem
going to have to defend. And, fi
this is actually a good thing fo
an opportunity for Scott Walker,
having a very difficult summer.
His numbers dropped dramatically
in a place like Iowa, a state he
win. Being able to be taken on b
and using that as a badge of hon
particularly helpful for him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just quickly,
his profile.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
And he put out a statement sayin
that Barack Obama is coming afte
that the Democrats think that I
threat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the one man
out on the trail today, we know
was Donald Trump. So I guess we'
wait and talk about him next wee
AMY WALTER: Yes. That will be...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: ... to see what he i
the stump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, Tamar
you.
TAMARA KEITH: Thank you.
AMY WALTER: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The nation of Den
a pioneer in wind energy product
year, nearly 40 percent of its e
came from wind power, and, by 20
an ambitious goal of having rene
provide 100 percent of the count
In the U.S., the Obama administr
released the Clean Power Plan, w
will lead to more renewable ener
Stephanie Joyce traveled to Denm
how that country is tackling the
She reports for Inside Energy. I
media collaboration funded by th
for Public Broadcasting, focusin
energy issues.
STEPHANIE JOYCE: Erik Malmkvist'
to be a lot easier, before renew
Malmkvist runs the power grid fo
an island of 40,000 people off t
Denmark. The island's electricit
is fairly predictable.
ERIK MALMKVIST, Denmark: You can
get up in the morning about half
then make something. And then th
and then they just stop. And tha
day. And that's the curves we ar
STEPHANIE JOYCE: But the island'
supply is becoming less predicta
most places, Bornholm used to ge
its power from coal and gas, but
than half comes from wind and so
fluctuate constantly.
ERIK MALMKVIST: You can see the
then suddenly it goes up and dow
time. So, it's very, very unstab
STEPHANIE JOYCE: As Denmark adds
energy, that mismatch between wh
is being produced and when it's
a growing problem.
But this sleepy fishing island i
a cutting-edge energy experiment
make the variability of wind and
of a problem. Bornholm has brand
the bright green test island and
a series of futuristic experimen
on the electric grid. The most a
is called EcoGrid E.U.
At the demonstration house, proj
Maja Bendtsen shows off how it w
MAJA BENDTSEN, Project Leader: S
some of the equipment that we're
the project.
STEPHANIE JOYCE: The EcoGrid pro
up the traditional relationship
supply and demand. It gets peopl
power when there's lots availabl
when there isn't. It's called de
Bendtsen uses a LEGO model to he
how demand response helps integr
solar into the island's grid. It
she learned about as a kid, when
installed a wind turbine on thei
MAJA BENDTSEN: When it was windy
up all the radiator valves full
heat the house. But because it w
the wind turbine -- the wind tur
anyway, the energy was free and
STEPHANIE JOYCE: The EcoGrid exp
relies on using more power when
renewable energy available, and
there isn't. But unlike when Ben
a kid, no one has to run around
closing radiator valves.
MAJA BENDTSEN: A signal goes thr
gateway, and then a signal to th
turn off the heat pump because n
price is high, and we are within
STEPHANIE JOYCE: The equipment g
about the real-time price of ele
When it's high, the equipment tu
heating and turns it back on aga
drop, so long as the temperature
a specified range, say, 70 to 75
MAJA BENDTSEN: Demand response h
at all to do with energy savings
do with using the energy when it
STEPHANIE JOYCE: Which helps wit
the grid, if it works.
KATHRI MARLUSSEN, Denmark: And t
power from the EcoGrid. They ins
one when I was signed in to the
STEPHANIE JOYCE: Kathri Marlusse
Bornholm and is a participant in
KATHRI MARLUSSEN: This is the pr
it's red, it's expensive.
STEPHANIE JOYCE: But although Ma
access real-time electricity pri
the project, the devices control
stopped working months ago. The
equipment still has some serious
KATHRI MARLUSSEN: The idea of th
is really good. But then there a
problems thus that I can't use i
it was supposed to.
STEPHANIE JOYCE: Marlussen somet
the price before doing laundry o
the dishwasher, but those consum
electricity compared to heating
KATHRI MARLUSSEN: It's a shame t
work the way it's supposed to do
STEPHANIE JOYCE: She's not the o
thinks so. Back on the mainland,
Christensen, the chief technolog
Dansk Energi, the Danish energy
He agrees it's a shame demand re
ready for prime time.
JORGEN CHRISTENSEN, Dansk Energi
overinvesting because we are not
the energy that we produce in a
STEPHANIE JOYCE: Overinvesting i
transmission lines and backup po
which wouldn't be necessary if d
worked better. Christensen is co
technical problems with demand r
get sorted out. But he's worried
take time to convince people of
maybe too much time, given the c
energy goals.
JORGEN CHRISTENSEN: If I would a
whether she would have a flexibl
charging of her electric vehicle
pump today, she would say, well,
heard about it today. So that's
there.
JACOB OSTERGAARD, Danish Technic
On the left side you have a pict
and the green dots are substatio
STEPHANIE JOYCE: On the campus o
Technical University, researcher
both the technological and the c
of the problem. They have been a
results of the Bornholm experime
excited about its promise.
But Jacob Ostergaard, who is in
the lab, says what they have don
just the beginning, and compares
nascent cell phone industry.
JACOB OSTERGAARD: You can say th
have developed is, basically, we
the smartphone and one app.
STEPHANIE JOYCE: The app being d
Now, in the analogy, Ostergaard
other apps to transform electric
same way the smartphone changed
He thinks, in a few years, we wo
about electricity the same way.
JACOB OSTERGAARD: Instead of buy
hours, which are very difficult
how much is a kilowatt hour and
we could buy comfort, for instan
buy 21 degrees Celsius in our ho
STEPHANIE JOYCE: That's a comfor
Fahrenheit.
Whatever those new ways of think
electricity end up being, more l
not, you will find them on Bornh
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Step
in Bornholm, Denmark.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
look at some interesting reporti
Not Trending.
Gwen Ifill recently recorded our
GWEN IFILL: This week, we're loo
thinkers you may not have heard
using advances in technology and
chart important new paths. That
effort to create a kind of a bio
a new way of building an eco-fri
made partially out of saltwater,
attracting new ballet lovers via
Carlos Watson is the founder and
which has stories about all of t
site. And he joins me now.
All the tech all the time, Carlo
CARLOS WATSON, CEO, OZY: Why not
you told me basketball was off t
football, rather, was off the ta
go tech.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Let's -- talking abo
idea of creating a working elect
of the brain.
CARLOS WATSON: It would be reall
would allow researchers to do al
things to pursue cures for thing
and other things, instead of usi
and other things, if you had a r
and well-functioning simulated e
brain.
So, they're starting to make pro
The U.S. has put $3 billion, Eur
others, but still a little ways
GWEN IFILL: But what does that m
it work? Exactly what are we tal
An actual model that you plug in
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: I don't know.
CARLOS WATSON: There's all kinds
it could take. And that's kind o
where it could live on a chip in
that looks a little more friendl
You know what was interesting? O
researchers in Manchester, the U
me that in order to power that -
it may come in a small case, wha
case looks like, in order to pow
says the computer power would ta
hangar. Like, that's how much po
need in order to do that.
GWEN IFILL: And the practical ap
is what?
CARLOS WATSON: So, two ones to t
One idea is faster, better, more
which hopefully brings us cures
like Alzheimer's and other thing
two, eventually -- and again, a
these things are decades away, n
away, but they're not hundreds o
-- might be helping you with sho
long-term memory lapses.
GWEN IFILL: What did you say? I'
forgot what you said.
(LAUGHTER)
CARLOS WATSON: You know what? Yo
moment, as we call them.
GWEN IFILL: Yes, I did.
CARLOS WATSON: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk about
of a battery that is powered by
CARLOS WATSON: Don't you love th
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
CARLOS WATSON: Everything is goi
It's not just Whole Foods anymor
GWEN IFILL: That's right.
CARLOS WATSON: The idea was that
we start tapping sun and wind po
whether it's panels on people's
sorts of other things, it's grea
sun is out, but what about when
down? How do you store that ener
fact being able to use it?
And so a lot of folks have begun
different kinds of batteries, ki
stable batteries, not the kind t
your car or go in your computer,
of a battery that might be in yo
in a university.
GWEN IFILL: Who is this guy Jay
CARLOS WATSON: You have got to l
Mellon professor who a number of
said that there is a better way
in fact can we create a batterie
some of this sun and wind power,
have got to not admit kind of to
So, they have go to be, if you w
eco-friendly? And in fact he wan
that it was so eco-friendly and
to make it and all that, that, f
or two, he actually bit into one
GWEN IFILL: You're kidding?
CARLOS WATSON: No, he's really n
eat it, instead of the good stuf
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: But he's proving tha
CARLOS WATSON: But he's proving
safer than the kind of toxic bat
that you're used to thinking abo
GWEN IFILL: And what would you u
CARLOS WATSON: You would use the
So, let's say you put solar pane
house. You generate a lot of ene
the day, but you want to use som
energy at night. These batteries
store it and allow you to use it
instead of using the electric gr
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk about
of this, which is a new venue pr
old art, which is to say YouTube
Cote?
CARLOS WATSON: Well, he's a Queb
those out there who are from Can
a 33-year-old principal dancer a
Ballet of Canada.
And while that, in and of itself
what's he's done is, he's kind o
in an era of ballet on the Web.
you're thinking, well, isn't eve
the Web?
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
CARLOS WATSON: And to some exten
But he did that was really speci
to create these little two-minut
gorgeous films of him and in som
doing ballet, and really brought
100 or 200 people.
GWEN IFILL: And gorgeous films a
man with the gorgeous films, whi
people -- part of the reason peo
Right?
CARLOS WATSON: You know what?
As he said to me -- I was talkin
He said, the honest truth is tha
naked, right? He said, I have go
on. But the truth of the matter
a fit athlete who, for two minut
motion, with really clear facial
that you wouldn't normally get i
sitting at the ballet.
And so he's bringing in literall
of thousands, but millions of ne
as he said himself, despite the
one of the world's best dancers,
him much before.
GWEN IFILL: Is there an economic
support reaching new audiences t
CARLOS WATSON: Not yet.
And that worries him, because ma
of these, even though they're on
long, sometimes he will spend $2
$50,000 doing them. So, he's onl
used a Kickstarter campaign. But
there's a way forward.
Now, the exception to this are s
big ballet companies like the Ne
Ballet and others, who are smart
these kind of films as ways to g
Carlos to go to the ballet and t
$200, $300 -- I know you do the
do the nicer tickets.
GWEN IFILL: It's who I am.
CARLOS WATSON: That's who you ar
knows. Maybe there's a way that
GWEN IFILL: Well, the brain, bat
dance all in one place.
Thank you very much, Carlos Wats
CARLOS WATSON: Always good to be
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
now: It's back-to-school time, a
students face that age-old chall
a major. On Making Sense, we sha
for choosing a student's passion
especially when unique majors ca
grads a new way of thinking abou
All that and more is on our Web
And that's the "NewsHour" for to
Tomorrow: how one gourmet chef i
up a way not to waste food.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here to
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHo
you, and good night.